Today is the 23rd of June 2009. My name is John Butler and I'm in the Connors Key
home of my former English teacher Kerry Hughes. Kerry you've kindly agreed to let me document
today something about your life as a student and a subsequent career both as a flinching
teacher and then as a worker in the research and education department of a global business.
Kerry let me start by asking you to tell us something of your early schooling and when you
might first have been aware that language, literature and learning were going to be the
focus of much of your life. I suppose that I was never aware of that. I mean one goes to school,
I went to an ordinary little church school in Connors Key. It was the one primary school that
Connors Key had. There was a little infant school and then you went to St Mark's school which was
a church school. The next other school was Shotton Primary and therefore the local children did not
walk or catch buses to Shotton Primary. Most of them went to St Mark's and left at 14.
The fellow who came to teach what might have been termed a scholarship class, except that there were
only four of us who were put in for the entrance examination for the grammar school in that year.
So it was four out of what 25 or 30. He detected we had ability and he was determined that he would
make every effort to get us through the exam. I mean I liked boarding school stories or something
of that sort and Alice in Wonderland and things like that I was given to read.
We were all taken to the Hippodrome to see David Copperfield, a film version of it, and we had to
write an essay on David Copperfield and I won the prize and I think it was
a shilling or two shillings or something like that. But obviously I had been very
struck by it. You then moved up to what was at the time known as Hardin County School.
Did you get there by an examination process? Was it called in those days the 11 plus?
No it was called a scholarship. You could go in for it at any age so that was why it wasn't called
the 11 plus. And Hardin County School was based on a four-year matriculation course.
O levels were later to be 11 plus entry and you did your O levels at 16. Now when I went to the
county school age 10 I was going obviously to do my matriculation course which was the equivalent
of O levels in four years and therefore I went into the sixth form at 14 because I had done that
in four years. This gave you an advantage. You had three years in the sixth form and you therefore
could sit scholarships for other places or you know improve on your results or something like
that and still only be 17 when you went to university. While still a child going to a
school quite a long way from your home in Connors Quay did you have to travel there daily and how
did you do that? Oh yes of course we had a private bus. Richardson's Buckley provided the bus and we
got on it and came home on it. And was that part of the school experience? Yes. Did you feel when
you first went to Hardin County School that you were entering a place of excellence? Oh I don't
think you have any judgment as to what is a place of excellence at that time. I mean so long as I
got good marks I really wasn't very bothered. I think that you judge a place after you've been
through it and you have the opportunity of judging it compared with other places. But was there any
particular awe that might have been engendered by your new surroundings something that might
have impressed you upon first entering? No because it was all the old buildings. It was not I mean
places that we found we we talked about later like the new corridor had only just come into
existence and the new hall was relatively new as well. Did your family have to make any sacrifice
to support your attendance at that school? No because I had I think a boss bursary when your
income when family income was looked at money was given for books or for travel or something like
that and in my case I had some grant towards the travel which as I record it was something
that throttled today anyway. Did you feel at the time that you had any sort of obligation to
succeed at school or were you self-motivated anyway? Neither I just did what I did my homework
and it generally got good marks and we had examinations at the end of pretty well every term
so you were able to keep track of where you were in the class. I had a cousin who had been top of
the county in the year that we passed for the county school. Her name was Meryl Bailey and
she could always beat me. If I became second in class Meryl was always first. Meryl sadly
died of peritonitis in our second year in the sixth form otherwise she would have gone on to
great things. Was the study of classics and in particular Latin the norm at schools like
Hardin County School? I should have thought so but I mean it was only available
to a certain number. As I recall it most people would encourage for example to do French
and the choice was French or Welsh. Only a small minority ever did Welsh and I think they felt
that one had to come from a Welsh background where Welsh would be spoken in the home. In the case of
the other three languages it was Latin, German, Spanish. You selected one of those. The Spanish
department was less strong and I suspect the Latin department was as well. The German department was
very strong indeed because George Lawson who was head of English was also head of German.
Did he give you a little verbal test on your expertise in Latin that was a deciding factor in
his letting you join a class? Oh no, no I had already joined the English class. I decided on my
subjects for higher school certificate and I was doing history, Latin, English and French but
he was rather appalled at the idea of 14 year olds going into the sixth form. He thought and
this I was one of the first to do this but it happened several years afterwards. I mean people
came into the sixth form the following year at exactly the same age and he thought we were too
immature. He was probably right but the incident you mentioned was he talked about
captive Greece taking captor Rome captive and he had a new dictionary of quotations. This was I
think the first Oxford dictionary of quotations or the first edition of it and he hadn't really
shown much interest in me. I don't think I'd written any good essays or anything like that.
Anyway he said you know where is this from and everybody looked a bit blank and I recall that
actually it was part of our school certificate Latin course included some Horace and it was a
part part of a bit of Horace so I said this and thereafter he took more interest in me because
he realised that I had recalled that but I mean I thought that he in his own way was
the sort of teacher that made you curious. He could plant a little seed and you would follow it up
and that was his great talent. There were two prizes in the sixth form available
to people who did well at A level which were called higher school certificates then and
the Henry Neville Gladstone prize I rather think was available to boys for
two years out of three and it was available to girls one year out of three. Everybody who was
in the history class in the sixth form was expected to write an essay annually called the
Gladstone essay and this subject was chosen by our history teacher and it would be on some aspect of
of what Victorian history and we submitted our rather lengthy essays and she then
selected the one that was best for a prize and in my third year in the sixth form the prize was
shared with another pupil myself. Apart from that there was another prize for girls only the Helen
Gladstone prize. I did win the Helen Gladstone prize yes £10 and of course it was supposed to
provide books. Well we had had the war heaven's sake it was not yet over and who was going to
spend £10 on books when they were going to university so it bought a dress didn't it? Well
it bought several dresses. Miss Thomason who was our history teacher and head of history of course
arranged with the authorities at St Daniel's that those of us who were learning history or
taking history in the sixth form should have the privilege of going down to St Daniel's library
to consult books if we needed to but perhaps to do some homework or something of that sort
and it involved a double period that is to say lessons lasting two school lessons and usually
were the last two in an afternoon so in my case it was a Friday afternoon that I used to go down
there. One didn't go every week it depended what there was on. We were allowed to go into what was
a relatively new wing as I recall it it was a bit like a breeze block structure or something of that
sort an annex of the library I suppose one would have said and I don't recall finding very much
that was terribly useful to me but it certainly was quiet and well it afforded
a studious place to learn. I don't think that I recall ever having seen anybody else in this
particular area on a Friday afternoon. I think that the more used books were elsewhere. I knew
that it catered for people who were ordained usually. I knew that it was Gladstone's own
library that he had moved from the castle there. I think that everything else was pretty well
a mystery. I can remember Alec Vidler as warden and seeing him in Hardin in his
grey cloak and looking rather interesting and different but I think that it was a place of
studious refuge. I don't think that I mean for example I had grandparents who lived in
Hardin and an aunt and uncle Meryl's parents who lived in Hardin and I never heard them discuss it.
It was just the library. It was there. It had Gladstonean connections and that was that.
I am aware only vaguely of the way it has been opened up and I have enjoyed several lunches
there. I don't think that it's easy to see any other part of it apart from separate days when
you can't go and have a tour of the library just at the drop of a hat as I understand it.
I think that I probably favour some things more than other things that I have heard go on there.
As somebody sitting highers in history we had it drummed into us by our history teacher that if
we could quote from Gladstone's speeches this would adorn our history answers and one of the
quotations that I remember was that the Turk needed clearing bag and baggage out of Europe
because they had maltreated the Armenian refugees and it therefore strikes me as odd that now there
is going to be an Islamist room at the library. I can only imagine that WE is turning over in his
grave. Were you aware at the time of Helen Gladstone's relationship to Hardin County School?
Apart from the fact that she was a daughter of WE as far as I know that was all I knew.
Does that suggest that maybe the Gladstone legacy in those times was not being exploited in the way
that it is today?
I don't know whether such things ought to be exploited. I think that if a family is good enough
to endow a school with prizes I don't think it's necessary to do any excessive publicity or something
of that sort. You get prizes given to schools by a variety of people. I know for example that
there was an Arthur Jones prize and a Florence Garland prize and these were in memory of two
members of staff who had unfortunately died during a summer holiday. And I gather that places like
I gather that places like Hollywood for example sometimes a member of staff can come along and
enjoy teaching there and leave something behind by way of an athletics prize or something like that.
When I went to university they were looking I was registering for the course and one of the senior
lecturers who anybody who studied Wordsworth will know his name was Earnshaw and he edited
the favourite edition of Wordsworth. He said oh good school when he saw where I came from.
I didn't really ever plan to do a degree in English literature. Most courses at universities
are labelled English literature. Mine was not. I selected Aberystwyth because it was English
language and literature and apart at that time from one of the Oxford colleges it was the only
place that was actually teaching Icelandic, Old Norse and the language. So I spent at least half
of my time on studying language as distinct from literature. I went to France for the first time
in my graduation year which was 1948 because we those of us who had a good enough degree
well first class honours degree and a second class top degree were eligible for £37 travelling grant
and I got that travelling grant and I went to visit my French exchange, French correspondent
and her family had gone to the area of Normandy near Caen for the summer and I went to stay with
them and then Denise and I travelled to Paris because they had a flat in Naye, a very fashionable
suburb of Paris so that was my first trip abroad. Thereafter I suppose that they happened
pretty frequently, I mean on the whole once every year.
Yes I did and I afterwards went over I think some of this gear was
taken onto the continent, I don't know whether I'm right, oh Brussels or somewhere like that and I
afterwards went to see it there. I don't think that it had the quality or the width of something
like the 1851 exhibition. I mean I know nothing about that first hand but I gather that the 1851
exhibition promoted Britain as an empire etc and was highly ranked among all the exhibitions
in the world whereas I thought that the 1951 exhibition didn't affect us locally and wasn't
of any great interest. I get very annoyed when I hear people talk about life in the 50s being dreary
because I would have said that we were so thankful that the war was over that we found
nothing dreary about being able to go out or have clothes and things like that. I mean it so happened
that I went to the West Riding of Yorkshire for just two terms and then came home and discovered
that the job at Hardin was going and I had 11 and 8 pence in my bank account and my mother said
wouldn't it be sensible to apply for the job just to get some money. I mean teachers were very badly
paid and it was a means to an end except that I'd always loved school and I knew that it would find
favour with the staff there who taught me because they'd always been nice and kind to me etc
and I just recall well going out with friends, going to quaint ways to dances and things of that
sort. I mean one went to the local cinemas and trips to London and all the rest of it.
It wasn't a long career in teaching. I'd been teaching 10 years so that's not a long career
in teaching really. I was determined to get out of teaching after I had done a fair amount of it and
I did get out of teaching. I mean as soon as firms were offering jobs and I decided when the
opportunity came that I would go into industry yes and I was looking around and I can truthfully say
there were very few opportunities. They were not keen, firms were not keen as they are now,
to accept a graduate whatever the discipline and say well all right we'll use your nouse.
I mean my niece who graduated with a degree in German in the what 70s was able to get a job with
ease comparatively not using her German. I went to work for Unilever on the site in Port Sunlight
there are there is Leaver Brothers obviously but there are about four other companies. Unilever
Research, Unilever Merseyside, Unilever Export, Unilever Limited and I went to research. I realised
swiftly that I really needed to learn some detergent chemistry to do this and I did so.
A lot of people fell by the wayside because they didn't want to do this. The particular job that
they had in mind when I went there and when I said I was interested in having a job there
was liaison with their education department in London which involved actually a bit of teaching
inasmuch as they then employed lots of girls who were personal advisors but they had to be given
correct information about fabrics and fibres and the various detergents that were then available
and they held meetings up and down the country and gave demonstrations to people etc.
So I became part and parcel of all this. I for example delivered a lecture on stain removal
to the South of Scotland Electricity Board personnel which was a great change from Shakespeare
but it was very enjoyable just the same because everything was done with
taste and aplomb. Unilever is a very good company.
When the grammar schools closed I was in industry and I was not in any way so pro that I was fighting
for the cause or anything like that. Had I been on the staff of the school I no doubt would have
felt very different about it but I thought that it was being done for all the wrong reasons.
Anthony Crossland was the villain of the piece so far as I was concerned and Shirley Williams.
I mean I reflect on Shirley Williams and I think of the fact that she was one of the children
evacuated from this country during the war by her mother Vera Britton and therefore when
um she has made a great fuss of as indeed she is it seems to me by a lot of male chairman of panels
I think that she betrayed the cause though I am a great admirer of Margaret Thatcher.
I'm afraid she did the same and she now I gather regrets it and I am a rather dismayed that when
people beg the Tory party to be on the side of the grammar schools if they want to have a grammar
school in their neighborhood it is quite clear that David Cameron has said no. On reflection
I do agree with pupils that I have met since who liked their grammar school experience to such an
extent that they were determined to bring their families to areas where grammar schools still
existed. I think that there is too little attention given in the comprehensive school
to the gifted child. We make all sorts of provisions for those with special needs.
Well as I see it being gifted is a special need and if there was greater evidence in the school
itself that gifted children were being given as much help as they could be given I would feel
more optimistic about the future. I would say that when I joined the comprehensive system
a lot of the staff were still grammar school staff. They had taught at Hollywood grammar school
which had a very good reputation and when I retired there were about
half a dozen men probably and four or five women who had been on the grammar school staff
or had themselves been taught at a grammar school. I am sure that the very fact that they have all
retired or left has affected the situation. I don't know how well or how badly. The ethos of the
grammar school was something that those of us who taught at the grammar school just almost
accidentally imposed. We weren't aware of the fact that we were doing it. It was just that we
treated children in a rather different way from the people who had been secondary modern. Well
it was very obvious in our treatment of the children that's all I can say. There's a very
fond relationship. It always speaks of you with great affection. Yes. Even with huge gaping.
Oh yes yes and I've always had I'm pleased to say that relationship with all pupils. I mean to say
you would have thought that at the comprehensive school I might not have found them so what shall
I say innately attractive to keep up a connection but that was not so. With the sixth forms it is a
different relationship that you have and I'm pleased to say that with boys and girls I've always had
well an ease of relationship that's all about it. I would say that I had very many bright pupils to
teach when I came to comprehensive education. The sixth form was virtually the same. It was full of
people who wanted to go to university or college and they were very equal to finding their way there.
Turning to recent concerns for the integrity of people in public life and the political systems
do you think present-day media is rising to the challenges traditionally that were the domain of
the fourth estate? I read the telegraph from cover to cover every day. I think that this
treatment of the expenses by the telegraph has been absolutely brilliant. I not only think that
it was very worthwhile doing but I don't know whether you saw the publication on Saturday
and I think that it has been beautifully done as a piece of what
well almost a picture post type thing. I think it is brilliant and all the people
responsible deserve congratulations. I like the spectator. I don't always buy it but at the moment
they have sent me five complimentary copies so I'm pleased about that. I am a great listener to
radio and to various programs that I respect like Melvin Bragg in our time and things of that sort.
I do take the trouble to listen to the Westminster Hour on a Sunday night in order to perhaps have
Caroline Quentin or before her Andrew Raunsley give me some left-wing ideas so that I don't
become too right-wing. I watch Channel 4 news. I do not on the whole watch BBC News. I cannot say
that I approve of the presenters on Channel 4 but I think that on the whole they do a better job of
of handling prejudice and bias better than the BBC does. The Today program is a case in point.
I mean I know what Jim Nocty's politics are and therefore I think he should be taken off the job
as an election comes nearer. I go to the cinema fairly regularly and the theatre fairly regularly.
I loathe popular culture and that's it.
What are the things in your life for which you might wish the people you taught would remember you by?
I don't know John. I think that introducing them to certain books. When I went to this particular
reunion I had people whose names I didn't remember coming up to me and saying oh I shall never
forget your lessons on Northanger Abbey and when I lost my daughter and this was a very
sad moment I found comfort in literature and all that you had taught us and you realised then that
just as I would claim that George Lawson was my mentor so to a degree I had been theirs.
That is a great responsibility that one doesn't imagine one has but I'm the most unambitious
creature you have ever encountered. I have never longed for a car or a house or for that matter a
husband. I have always just been content with the moment.
Kerry Hughes thank you for our conversation today. Thank you John.